First Last
Date
Dr. Professor
Econ 0000 - Section 0000
	
  In this project, data is being analyzed to report back to the EPA. They are interested in 
determining what factors in a car contribute to fuel efficiency because car emissions and fuel 
consumption can be reduced by making cars more efficient. This analysis is important because it 
will guide policy towards making more efficient vehicles to reduce carbon emissions.
      
      This dataset is from a 1974 edition of ÒMotor TrendsÓ magazine. In the dataset, there are 
thirty-two different types of cars observed and ten factors that measure performance. For this 
model, we are interested in what factors will best predict fuel efficiency (miles per gallon) out of 
the ten in the dataset. The factors are listed below as well as the means of the dependent and 
independent variables of the suggested linear model.

Variables:
Names of cars = car_models
Miles per gallon = mpg
Type of transmission (0=automatic, 1= manual) = am
Weight (1000lbs) = wt 
Number of cylinders = cyl
Rear axle ratio= drat
V Shaped (0) vs Straight (1) engine = vs
Number of gears = gear
Number of carburetors = carb
Horsepower = hp
Quarter mile time (seconds) = qsec
Means for IV and DV:
Mean_mpg = 20.090625
Mean_hp = 146.6875
	
  The suggested model is a decent model. There are significant p values for the B0 and B1 
values. Within the confidence intervals for the coefficients, zero is not a possible value. The R-
squared is high enough at 0.5892 to indicate good inferential quality. The coefficient for hp is 
very statistically significant and slightly negative, indicating a negative relationship between 
mpg and hp. Intuitively, it makes sense that horsepower would be a negative factor in fuel 
efficiency, since sports cars and trucks typically have low fuel efficiency and high horsepower.
      
      I played around with adding different variables to form a new model, but I found that 
adding only weight to the previous model resulted in the most significant increase in explaining 
the variance in the model. Many of the variables would have caused multicollinearity (like 
quarter mile time) or are irrelevant (like the number of gears). I decided to do a log log 
transformation to tighten the data. The adjusted r-squared value rose to 0.8748. The slope 
coefficients, loghp and logwt became very statistically significant. The residual standard error 
dropped dramatically from 3.863 in the suggested model to 0.1054 in the new model.
      
      I think that the second model is better for describing the fuel efficiency of a given car. 
Intuitively, it seems like horsepower and weight are the biggest factors in the fuel efficiency of 
the car; this is backed up by experimenting with log transformations to adjust for nonlinearity in 
hp which was evident when viewing a scatterplot of hp as the IV and mpg as the DV. The p-
values for the coefficients on the second model are significant and the R-squared is significantly 
higher. The residual standard error is also much smaller than the original simple model, meaning 
it fits the data much better than the suggested model. I would trust the second modelÕs prediction 
because it more comprehensively explains the factors behind fuel efficiency and it is a better 
model objectively - based on SER, R-squared, and P-values. 
      
      To summarize, a model was created to predict the factors that contribute to fuel 
efficiency. Though the first model was good, adding wt and a log log transformation 
significantly increased the quality of the model. For the EPA, it is suggested that they introduce 
regulation to incentivize the production of lighter less powerful cars to increase fuel-efficiency. 
      
      
      
      
      

      
